Phase 2: statistical inference, data mining, key insights and conclusions

6.3 Phase 2

The following steps must be accomplished for the first phase of the project. Note that these steps do not have to be done
strictly in a sequential order.


6.3.1 Data Mining

Your project must involve the use of at least one (1) of the following data mining techniques: rule mining, clustering, or
collaborative filtering. Variants of the above approaches, even if not discussed in class, are also welcome provided that you are
able to explain them on a theoretical level. You are also welcome to apply other computational techniques beyond the scope
of CSMODEL, such as machine learning, provided that you have already satisfied the minimum data mining requirement.

In the Notebook, keep in mind the following reminders when presenting the data mining sections:
    • If needed, perform preprocessing techniques to transform the data to the appropriate representation before performing
      data mining. This may include binning, log transformation, conversion to one-hot encoding, normalization, standard-
      ization, interpolation, truncation, and feature engineering.
    • Some algorithms require the values to be scaled. Make sure to consider this before data mining.
    • You are encouraged to use the code that you have from your assignments in a thoughtful manner.


6.3.2 Statistical Inference

Your project must involve the use of statistical inference techniques to confirm (or disprove) the conclusions generated.
At least three (3) statistical tests must be performed. These tests can be incorporated whereever appropriate in the data
narrative. For example, it can be used to test the significance of findings from exploratory data analysis questions, or it can
be used to test the validity of the conclusions generated from the data mining techniques.
In the Notebook, keep in mind the following reminders when presenting the statistical inference sections:

    • Use statistical inference methods discussed in class.
    • Properly state both hypotheses (your hypothesis and the null hypothesis)
    • Make sure to show the necessary assumptions and requirements of the statistical tests used, and justify why it is apprpropriate to use that test for your data. For example, some statistical tests might require that
      data is more or less normally distributed.
    • Discuss any preprocessing steps you did before computing for the p-value.
    • Explicitly mention the important values of the tests such as the p-value and the significance level used.


6.3.3 Insights and Conclusions

At the end of the Notebook, you must include a summary of the key findings and insights that were generated from the
project. Make sure that all conclusions are backed up with evidence and statiscal tests from the empirical data.
Keep in mind that you must produce a cohesive data narrative about your dataset. That is, the process that you do
in the project, including the data mining and statistical inference requirements, must tie together into a meaningful story
centered around your general research question. The insights and conclusions at the end of the Notebook must provide a
satisfying resolution to the narrative you are telling